what is meaningful and what is
meaningless in life it's really easy to
go into a particular conversation a
particular debate whether it's about
your personal life your professional
life your sex life your intellectual
life it's really easy to go into a
debate with the assumption that the
difference between what's meaningful and
what's meaningless is an objectively
real distinction that's clear to all
parties involved in the debate and it's
almost never true I think even if
there's no one you're debating with if
you're sitting there alone examining
your own life looking back on what you
did in the last 10 years and looking
forward to what you're doing in the next
10 years I don't think you should treat
it as a settle distinction I think you
should never stop questioning never stop
doubting what's meaningful and what's
meaningless anyway and I never stop
doubting I never stop doubting this is
the lava as most people refer to the
text daodejing
this is ancient Chinese philosophy I am
the last person on earth to preach to
you that everyone should read this book
or this book would be meaningful or
life-changing for you and you and you
out in the audience I would never do
that on the contrary I'm really
self-critical I can remember very
clearly what was meaningful to me above
this book back when I was 21 years old
something like that and how completely
differently I read the book now what
what was invisible to me in the text
before and what left forward and seems
salient and important the text before
and what seems meaningful to me now and
in reference to to both men the man I
was and the man I am now I'm really kind
of critical I'm really doubtful he's
this meaningful is this meaningless so
we took a block of time my girlfriend
and I we sat down and we read this text
together and I mean we sat at a table
and had the book open and I read the
text to her in English out loud and at
some points I stopped and commented on
what the original Chinese meant at some
points I stopped and told her anecdotes
from the first time I studied this text
with Professor Leonard Priestley his
lectures and what he drew attention to
and analysis and history of the text and
other kind of
extraneous anecdotes and clarifications
but the ways in which Taoism is
different from Buddhism and Taoism is
different Confucianism how they all
contribute to and participate in the
history of Chinese intellectual thought
some people are gonna hear this and
think wow I wish my husband sat down and
did that with me I wish my boyfriend
spent quality time with me sitting with
me and reading and Tiger both teach me
about and hope these kinds of things and
some people are gonna hear this and
think wow how completely meaningless I'd
rather I'd rather watch ice hockey I'd
rather watch a football game with my
boyfriend drinking beer next to me on
the couch that's what you want there's
plenty of room on the couch it's not
you're not gonna run out of
opportunities to spend your time doing
that and it would be really easy for
someone like me to sit here and in a
smug judgmental way treat the
distinction between what's meaningful
and what's meaningless as self-evident
and agreed-upon mo and it's not it's not
EW I don't even agree with myself on I'm
constantly challenging myself as to
what's meaningful almost meaningless so
what what would make the study of this
text meaningful well I already mentioned
one of the easy answers in terms of why
you justify teaching this in a
university is talking about what Taoism
is in contrast to Buddhism in contrast
to Confucianism Carter's to these other
traditions in China so that you
understand the mutual distinctions and
the intellectual competition between
them another huge topic I was starting
my girlfriend about is the difference
between real Taoism Taoism is as exists
in the real world and the ideas about
Taoism that European intellectuals have
kind of created and propounded and when
we visited ty dome she got to see plenty
of real-world doe ism she got to see
their religion as it exists in Taiwan
today in contrast to I don't know some
kind of dry library room you know
drawing-room notions that were that were
propounded in popularized in Europe I
would say especially in the period right
after World War Two and another really
interesting gap is that it is the gap
between languages and cultures is the
question of untranslatable ax T which is
partly cultural and is partly linguistic
so for me reading this now at age 40
unlike the man I was at 21 section five
the English reads heaven and earth is
not sentimental whoa what what an under
translation it's shocking to me it's
genuinely shocking for me to read the
translation that says heaven and earth
have no benevolence have no run re n
opinion wow this is a shocking an
iconoclastic statement then you read the
whole paragraph or even just that that
sentence this is really telling you
heaven heaven and earth you know which
doesn't just mean a monotheistic God but
it kind of includes for the Chinese a
Creator God and spirits a whole
animistic universe of demigods or what
have you but yeah ten heaven is also
it's also a kind of abstract concepts
but they don't care if you live or die
heaven and earth have no no benevolence
no compassion they don't care what they
treat you as a disposable sacrificial
animal Wow and this is right at the
start of the text this is an
unbelievably bleak nihilistic
iconoclastic statement in in a
foundational religious texts for Taoism
now to present it to someone with no
other context name which is just heaven
and earth is not sentimental it treats
all things as straw dogs
there's no way anyone could arrive at
the meaning of that passage by reading
the English and there's no way you could
have a sense of the sentiment and the
emotional import and the impact of that
so well those are also to me meaningful
questions right to me I can't sit here
and say that anyone else this is this is
meaningful a rewarding or how this would
be
how this would be useful in your lives
now this connects to a couple of other
questions that that are really ongoing
and live for me right now I mean it is
that this is not chalkboard in my life
this relates the question of in what way
is university education meaningful for
people the vast river people go to
university and study things that have no
real world application that don't
qualify them for a job political science
major so I'm now qualified to do
political analysis on YouTube yeah what
job did that did that qualify me for I
have here of a pathetic poster pamphlet
for university program here in Taiwan
that ends by very vaguely telling you
that it will facilitate students
capacity in their competitiveness in the
pursuit of an individual career and I
really crossed swords with professors at
University of Victoria this is this is
Asian Studies this program University of
Victoria was an Asian Studies okay what
are we doing here what are we studying
what are we preparing people for now
maybe it's this maybe it's hey we're
preparing a new generation of Canadians
to really have a refined knowledge of
the difference between Taoism and
Buddhism the difference between
Confucianism and legalism different
philosophies this Jeff but no that's not
that's not what they were doing maybe
we're preparing people you know for for
some other career or some other life but
the role of Education and what's
meaningful in a purely subjective sense
in this larger institutional sense
that's something that haunts me it's an
issue I I care about right now now how
is this text different for me at age 40
and age 21 this connects exactly this
question
it's amazing that already at this
primitive stage in the history of China
long before the development of the
National exam system or the Imperial
exam system or the Emperor's exam system
I wanna say long before organized
education in China had gotten organized
what's crystal clear in this book is
that the audience he is addressing the
audience the author is writing for is
the class of scholar bureaucrat men who
were civil servants but it doesn't
translate the
no way to translate the sense of who
these men were their sense of themselves
their sense of their role in life these
were men who among other things presided
over people being interrogated being
tortured being judged and being executed
you know they were they were pretty much
judge jury and executioner not quite a
little bit Fidel think they've they held
the swords themselves but they were
responsible for life and death decisions
over individual cases involving
individual people
all Chinese justice of that kind of time
involved torture you can read graphic
historical accounts of that from all
different angles people who are Pro
torture shiney the Chinese justice
system involved slavery - you know
people get tattooed on the face and be
made into a slave as as a punishment in
some ways an unbelievably brutal role in
life and we're talking about what it
means to be compassionate what it means
to be a good word what it means to be
reasonable when you're in that role of
the not quite a ruler not a king the
English are uses the word governor a lot
when you're involved in governing when
you're involved in government and that
is profoundly different from reading a
Christian scripture I mean to whom or
the Gospels addressed not to not to a
scholar bureaucrat right but the
assumption of this text and again the
degree of difficulty even in reading
this text and having this level of
literacy in this person it completely
assumes it will only be read by the
scholar bureaucrats of society right
that's not the audience the Christian
gospel is written for that's not the
audience the Quran in in Islam is
written for and it's it's such a weird
contrast having now spent years and
years reading Buddhist scriptures
Buddhist Sutent
in the years in between it stands out to
me so much is a distinctive feature of
the Chinese philosophy and and Taoism
specifically Wow even here it's really
all about this role of extraordinary
responsibility and yeah Airy addition to
of the scholar bureaucrat that's by and
for scholar bureaucrats and back when I
was whatever I was 21 years old there
about
when I was a university student that did
not stand out to me at all on the
contract kind of scoffed and dismissed
the political content of lotsa but at
every stage of this book this is a
political science book this is political
philosophy from start to finish yeah
there's also epistemology there's also
there also you know straightforward
doctrinal sentiments in there but above
all else it's its political character
you know really stands out to me so as I
mentioned this book was written long
long before the creation of the system
of national examinations and this comes
back to the contrast the bel eastern
assumptions of the University versus
Western assumptions with University in
the Western world we made very rapid
progress from the Dark Ages to the
Industrial Revolution because the
concept of organized education in Europe
emerged on the one hand out of European
Christian monasticism explicitly
Christian Bible colleges what are you
want to say monastic were factories and
all the rest of it but monastic
organized education and then on the
other hand out of European military
education and under the sudden need to
have people who could do complex
mathematics and certain types of science
for the army out of this we created
these durable institutions called
universities that's really what it arose
from and again you can look at a
specific historical example like
Scotland Scotland and the Scottish
enlightenment the Scottish had no
natural advantages over the rest of
Europe but they really took this stuff
where they disadvantages and was partly
in response to those disadvantage they
started building these universities they
wanted to have enough medical doctors to
put on ships because they had a
shipbuilding industry so they needed a
lot of medical doctors they needed
universities to standardize the use of
language because it's in Scotland they
were speaking a bunch of local dialects
nobody else understood there were
reasons why organised education got
organised in Scotland but it was in
response to disadvantages not advantages
and it is fair to say that neither India
nor China took those same steps forward
in institutionalizing education now the
disadvantages today
all these countries in Asia have
imitated and reproduced the advantages
and disadvantages of European and
American style education the system of
education that existed in medieval China
pre-modern China ancient China is gone
but for so many centuries all of Chinese
society was reorganized under the
impetus provided just by the government
providing standardized exams not a
system of education if anything this was
this is the opposite this is a known and
systematic education the Emperor
provides an exam and then everyone else
in China parents tutors independent
school teachers they all have to
scramble around to get organized and
provide people with lessons provide
people classrooms they've got to sort it
out for themselves how they're gonna
prepare people to write this exams
everyone knows what's gonna be in the
exam everyone knows what you need to
know what you need to learn but the role
of government was not in providing an
education system it was providing the
criteria by which you would be evaluated
and that exam was 100% linked to
advancement in social status in standing
to becoming what what Louds a here
called a sage what I'm calling a scholar
bureaucrat becoming one of the men who
gets to sit in judgment over who gets
tortured and who gets executed it was
precisely the path to becoming a civil
servant in the society that uniquely
admired and valued the civil servant and
that those men were also rewarded of
course with a relatively luxurious
lifestyle and income so that's a a model
of Education where education is 100%
linked to employment 100% linked to
social advancement and in the West what
we've ended up with even though we had
this tremendous dynamism in Europe in
emerging from the dark ages and pressing
the words Industrial Revolution Scottish
enlightenment invention of the discovery
of electromagnetism the steam engine
taking technologies that already existed
elsewhere like gunpowder but then
adapting them and
modern artillery out of them and so on
this is stuff that happened in Europe
and that's why Europe went on to conquer
large parts the world for better and for
worse from my opinion mostly for worse
of course my biased opinion but what
happened in the West was that the
institution ossified the institution of
the university became an end in itself
and today people pay to go to
universities a families literally
bankrupt themselves to put their
children universities people live with
more than a hundred thousand dollars in
debt to go to university and they don't
even believe in what it is they're
learning they don't believe that they
are going to become more erudite people
they don't believe they're going to
become people with even a higher
aesthetic appreciation for life they
don't believe they're going to become
people who listen to better music or ah
have have a more elevated appreciation
for the theater or something they
certainly do not think their people are
gonna elevate themselves in this you
know partly religious partly civic and
political understanding of social
hierarchy people are signing up to go to
university I think it's no exaggeration
to say just so they can say they went to
university and look this this is in no
small part the tragedy of of Western
civilization right now that I really
think Eastern civilization can kind of
hold up a mirror for during my childhood
in Ontario we had a Conservative
government that boldly declared they
were going to reduce the budget and have
low taxes and lower government budget by
some enormous percent they were going to
have lower taxes in a smaller budget and
when they were elected they promised
they would do this without in any way
reducing the money spent on education or
healthcare and I remember one of my
teachers said have you looked at the
government budget I was a kid of course
and you know he said to the class
what percentage of the budget for
Ontario is anything other than education
and healthcare and that was the first
time I really sat and looked at the
numbers and look at the pie chart really
thought about it that Wow
the awesome responsibilities of
government is in very large part
education the education we don't think
of it that way
education is the work of government the
decisions about education are themselves
ineluctably political and there's no
going back I mean they're they always
will be today China still has the
culture of the National exam in terms of
the way they regard University and
organize you high school more than
university because the exams that will
get you into university the sense of a
national standardized examination that
takes the measure of your soul it's a
huge thing in Chinese culture but of
course today they have a government
system of Education so I'm left looking
back at this and questioning what's
meaningful in what's meaning meaningless
in my own life and as with so many
things ultimately it's a somber set of
meditations on the shortcomings of the
education system that I happen to be
born into and I'm left with a sort of
ashen conviction that one way or another
things have got to change change is
objectively real improvement is a
question of ideology I can tell you
system is going to get better rather
than worse but my whole life this set of
assumptions that emerged in such an a
certain way from the dark ages in
Industrial Revolution this set of
assumptions about higher education
they've been creaking and groaning under
the weight of new expectations in a new
economy and I just can't believe that
the Western world is going to go on
bankrupting itself to provide the next
generation with the type of education
that is not only worthless but that
nobody believes in that nobody values
and I can't believe that the eastern
world that Taiwan where I'm living now
or Japan that they are going to bankrupt
themselves just to have the satisfaction
of imitating on
Arkan culture